**Shoreline Change Prediction Model: Utilizing Simple Outputs and Topologies from Shoreline Change Analysis to Model Future Shoreline Positions using ArcPy Scripting**

Stephen Escarzaga

*Introduction*

As the reality of a human-induced climate warming sets in, threats of increased storm activity, increasing temperatures and sea-level rise are mounting. These threats in particular have a disproportionate effect on those live in the coastal zones of the world. According to a United Nations assessment, 40% of the world's population lives within 100 kilometers of the coast [1]. Furthermore, it stresses the importance of recognizing the vulnerability these high percentages of our population to sea-level rise and other coastal hazards like storms surges [1]. Coastal businesses, residencies and municipal and private institutions are thought to be but some of the entities impacted by climate driven threats [2] In addition to the numerous financial and public health effects mentioned above, the IPCC's "Coastal systems and low-lying areas" assessment states numerous ecological effects including coral bleaching, saltmarsh and Coastal wetland degradation, and increased flooding of freshwater resources and fisheries [2]. With very high confidence, coastal zones and the communities the support with will be subject to increasing risk of coastal erosion and retreat. With the addition of loss of sea ice, Arctic coastlines are likely to become one of the most climate-change impacted environments on Earth due to coastal erosion and retreat [3]. Studies done along the Elson Lagoon of the North Slope of Alaska show rates of erosion of 1-4 meters per year from 2003-2011, which translates to 16.72ha of land eroded [4]. Arctic permafrost, like the shoreline bluff edges of the North Slope of Alaska, hold approximately half of the global soil organic carbon pool [5]. Further thawing and eroding of these continuous permafrost coastlines poses the even greater threat of accelerating climate change by dumping more carbon into the atmosphere [5].

The IPCC currently states the lack of dynamic predictions of landform migration as an impediment do successful adaptation coastal zone changes [2]. Local and state managers can benefit greatly with the help of shoreline prediction methods, utilizing methods already used to measure recent and historical shoreline change. Currently, the United States Geological Survey studies and assesses shoreline change throughout the coastlines of the 48 states, Hawaii and Alaska through their National Assessment of Shoreline Change. Their recent assessment titled "Historical Shoreline Change Along the North Coast of Alaska, U.S.-Canadian Border to Icy Cape" covers much of the North Slope of Alaska, including regions of defense , energy-related infrastructure, coastal habitat and Native American interests [6]. These assessments are made using digitized shorelines from historical imagery and statistically analyzed revealing long-term rates of erosion. However, these assessments do not include measures of shoreline position predictions throughout the study sites. The Alaska Department of Natural Resources offers modeled and predicted shoreline positions on their "Alaska Shoreline Change Tool" [7] online web mapping tool. The has the option of show one or a few projected shoreline positions for some areas of Alaska. This approach may be helpful in some cases but not in all. If a researcher or local land manager wanted to know the relative risk of coastal retreat to a municipal facilities or fresh water resource, he or she would likely need to choose the year to which to predict shoreline position. He or she may even want to iterate this process to visualize, in a time step fashion the coastlines movement in relation to their region of interest.

The objective of this tool was to create a simple, data driven model to predict shoreline position in the future. The goals were to make this model interactive an environment (ArcGIS) where shoreline change analysis are already being conducted to facilitate ease of use and standardization within a researcher&#39;s ROI. The script was written in Python with ArcPy commands that allow it to use the ArcGIS infrastructure. It was important to allow the researcher to use the same DSAS inputs and outputs they'd generate analyzing shoreline change to use in the modeling of future shoreline position. It was also important to design this model to allow for iteration. The next goal was to then test this model on a stretch of coastline along the Elson Lagoon in the North Slope of Alaska (Figure1) for which I've obtained 9 years of shoreline position data from 2003 to present. This 312 meter stretch of actively eroding coastline is a mere 70 meters from a large thaw lake. Drained lakes in this region are common and are distributed among numerous mechanism of drainage including breach by coastal erosion[8]. Lakes such as this one in this study are essential habitats for migratory birds [9] and increased drainage of these lakes are great concern by to the native Arctic communities that rely on these bird species for subsistence hunting [9].
    
*Methods*

The shoreline prediction model uses direct inputs and outputs from a tool called the Digital Shoreline Analysis System (DSAS version 4.0). The tool is a plugin for ArcMap (version 10.0 - 10.5) and was created by the USGS. As seen in Figure 2, the system inputs require digitized, vector format shorelines from different years or time periods. The tool will then create vector lines call "transects" that orient perpendicular to the digitized shorelines. It is along these transects that the system measures erosion rate. Also in Figure 2, the system will output a series of intersect points indicating where all shorelines interested transects. Finally, DSAS will output erosion rates and error statistics (confidence intervals namely) for each transect feature. Figure 3 shows the ROI with digitized shorelines, transects and intersect points.

In the broadest sense, this model will make new intersect points farther down each transect line to simulate a retreating shoreline with each run of the model. The distance from the 0 time step (2015) to the new modeled intersect points depends on the erosion rate for that particular transect line and the number of years the user inputs into the model. The entities (Table 1) of this model are Lines (transects), points (intersect), and Time (# of years to project to). Properties (Table 1) of these entities are as follows: Erosion rate, buffer distance, topological relationship for lines; XY Coordinates and Topological Relationship for points; and number of years for Time. Topological relationship is the geometric overlapping of the points and lines entities. This relationship was exploited in the script to ensure that points moved along lines that shared the same ID in their attribute tables. Lines 25-44 in Script 1 show where the model utilized "measureOnLine" and "positionAlongLine" commands to place a new XY coordinate along a line with the same ID at a measured distance. It is this topological relationship, individual erosion rate and number of years input to the model that will dictate the new XY coordinates for the modeled shoreline position (Figure 4). As mentioned before, DSAS will output calculated confidence interval values for each calculated erosions rate. This model uses this value as a buffer distance for the final predicted shoreline to symbolize uncertainty. Figure 4 shows "# of years" interacting with this buffer distance as the model is set up to multiply this buffer distance by the number of years the user originally inputs for shoreline prediction. The more years the user models the shoreline into the future, the larger the uncertainty of the shoreline.

This script is run outside of ArcMap, however, the entities it calls for are shapefiles and/or tables readable by ArcMap 10.2.2. The following is a step by step description of the model workflow (a broader workflow is detailed in _Figure 5):_ The script begins by running a statistical analysis on the points feature to extract the mean confidence interval for all points along the section of coast.  An expression is created to add new fields to the points shape file for new X and Y coordinates then populate those fields with new values that represent the modeled shoreline (This is where the user would input the number of years he or she wishes to model the shoreline to). These new XY fields are then written to a text file but not before the script checks for the text file that may be present from previous model runs and then deletes them if it exists. This new XY data is then read and saved as a new point shapefile. A points-to-line tool is then run on these new points creating the new modeled shoreline. Then then that new shoreline feature is buffered with a distance of the mean confidence interval calculated at the beginning of the model. Finally, the script deletes the new X and Y coordinate fields in the original points shapefile to allow for future model iterations. With this set up, there are intermediate features created like the new points shapefile that are continuously overwritten so the user doesn&#39;t need to worry about file locks.

*Results*

The model was successfully run for three different projection years: a 25, 45 and 65 year projection (Figure 6, Figure 7, Figure 8). This created shorelines and uncertainty buffers that incrementally moved inland toward East Twin Lake. The 65 year projection was the first model run to have is predicted shoreline position touch the boundary of East Twin Lake, suggesting lake breach and drainage no later than 2080. However it's quite obvious when viewing these predicted shorelines that their shapes are much more erratic and exaggerated than those of the measure shorelines and becomes more so after each subsequent time step. When in reality the coastline assumes a much more smooth shape. This is due to the propagation of variance (relatively low from original point to point) through each time step, thereby multiplying its magnitude. This may also be partly due to the spacing between points (I originally used 10m spacing). So It was then decided to degrade the original number of points to create more distance between points. Electing to use only every other 5 points, the spacing between points was greatly enhanced in the hopes of giving the modeled line a more generalized and realistic shape. Additionally, a step was added in the script to smooth the new predicted shoreline feature to further generalize its shape. Figures 9, 10 and 11 show the results of this new protocol with a 20, 40, and 65 year projection. These simplified shorelines are indeed smoother and less exaggerated. However, they still do not resemble the generalized shape of the measured shorelines, with the exception of the 20 year projection.
